[Music]
science science has has allowed us to
know so much about the far reaches of
the the universe which is at the same
time tremendously important and
extremely remote and yet much much
closer much more directly related to us
there are many things we don't fully
understand and one of them is the
extraordinary social complexity of the
animals around us and today I want to
tell you a few stories of animal
complexity the first what we call
complexity what is complex
well complex is not complicated
something complicated comprises many
small parts all different and each of
them has its own precise role of a
machinery on the opposite a complex
system is made of many many similar
parts and it is their interaction that
produces the globally Korean behavior
complex systems have many interacting
parts which behave according to simple
individual rules and these results in
emergent properties the behavior of the
system as a whole cannot be predicted
from the individual rules only as a
risotto road the whole is greater than
the sum of its parts
but Maurice taught so let's move on to a
more concrete example of complex system
these are Scottish terriers in the
beginning the system is disorganized
then comes a perturbation milk every
individual starts pushing in one
direction and this is what happens the
pinwheel is an emergent property of the
interactions between puppies whose only
rule is to try and keep access to the
milk and therefore to push in a random
direction so it's all about finding the
simple rules from which complexity
emerges
I call this simplifying complexity and
it's what we do at Shell systems is
at ETH Zurich we collect data on animal
populations analyze complex patterns try
to explain them
it requires physicists who work with
biologists with mathematicians and
computer scientists and it is their
interaction that produces cross-boundary
competence to solve these problems
so again the whole is greater than the
sum of the parts in a way collaboration
is another example of complex system and
you may be asking yourself which side
among biology or physics in fact it's a
it's a little different and to explain I
need to tell you a short story about
myself when I was a child I loved to
build stuff to create complicated
machines so I set out to study
Electrical Engineering and robotics and
my my end of studies project was a was
about building a robot called er one
looked like this that would collect
information from its environment and
proceeded to follow a white line on the
ground it was very very complicated but
it worked beautifully in our test room
and on demo day professors had assembled
to grade the project so we took er one
to the evaluation room turned out the
light in that room was slightly
different the Roberts vision system got
confused at the first bend in the line
it left his course and crashed into a
wall we had spent weeks building it and
all it took to Detroit was a subtle
change in the color of the light in the
room that's when I realized that the
more complicated you make a machine the
more likely that it will fail due to
something absolutely unexpected and I
decided that in fact I didn't really
want to create complicated stuff I
wanted to understand complexity the
complexity of the world around us and
especially in the animal kingdom which
brings us to bats passions bats are
common species of European bats there
are very social animals mostly they
roost or sleep together and they live in
maternity colonies which means that
every spring the females
after the winter hibernation and they
stayed together for about six months to
rear their young and they all carry a
very small chip which means that every
time one of them Anton enters one of
these specially equipped bat boxes we
know where she is and more importantly
we know with whom she is size study
roosting associations in bats and this
is what it looks like during the day the
bats roost in a number of subgroups in
different boxes it could be that on one
day the corn is split between two boxes
but on another day it could be together
in a single box or split between three
or more boxes and that all seems rather
erratic really is called fission fusion
dynamics the property for an animal
group of regularly splitting and merging
into different subgroups so what we do
is take all these data from all these
different days and pull them together to
extract a long-term Association pattern
by applying techniques of network
analysis to get a complete picture of
the social structure of the colony okay
so that's what this picture looks like
in this network although all the circles
are nodes individual bats and the lines
between them are social bonds
associations between individuals turns
out this is a very interesting picture
this bat colony is organized in two
different communities which cannot be
predicted from the daily fission fusion
dynamics we call them cryptic social
units even more interesting in fact
every year around around October the
colony splits up and all bats hibernate
separately but year after year when the
bats come together again in a spring the
communities stay the same so these bats
remember their friends for really long
time with a brain the size of a peanut
then maintain individualized long-term
social bonds we didn't know that was
possible
we knew that primates and elephants and
dolphins could do that but compared to
baths that have huge brains so
how could it be that the bats
maintaining this complex stable social
structure with such limited cognitive
cognitive abilities and this is where
complexity brings an answer to an
assembly system we built a computer
model of roosting based on simple
individual rules and simulated thousands
and thousands of days in a virtual bat
colony it's a mathematical model but
it's not complicated
well the model told us is that in a
nutshell each but knows a few other
colony members as her friends is just
slightly more likely to roost in a box
with them simple individual rules this
is all it takes to explain the social
complexity of these bats but it gets
better between 2010 and 2011 the colony
lost more than two-thirds of its members
probably due to the very cold winter the
next spring it didn't form two
communities like every year which may
have led the whole colony to die because
it had become too small instead it
formed a single cohesive social unit
which allowed the colony to survive that
season and thrive again in the next two
years what we know is that the bats are
not aware that their colony is doing
this all they do is follow simple
Association rules and from this
simplicity emerges social complexity
which allows the colony to be resilient
against dramatic changes in the
population structure and I found this
incredible now on to tell you another
story but for this we have to travel
from Europe to the Kalahari Desert in
South Africa this is where Americans
live unfurl you know Americas they're
fascinating creatures they live in
groups with a very strict social
hierarchy and there is one dominant pair
and many subordinates some acting as
sentinels from acting as babysitters
some teaching pups and so on what we do
is put very small GPS collars on these
animals to study how they move together
and what this has to do with our social
structure and there's a very interesting
example of collective movement in
in the middle of the reserved which they
live in lies a road on the on this road
there are cars so it's dangerous but the
meerkats have to cross it to get from
one feeding place to another so we asked
how exactly do they do this we found
that the dominant female is mostly the
one who leads the group to the road but
when it comes to crossing it crossing
the road
she gives way to the subordinate a man
I'm saying you know go ahead tell me if
it's safe what I didn't know in fact was
what rules in their behavior the
meerkats follow for this change at the
edge of the group to happen and if
simple rules were sufficient to explain
it so I built a model a model of
simulating meerkats crossing a simulated
road it's a simplistic model moving
methods are like random particles whose
unique rule is wonderful einman they
simply move together when these
particles get to the road they send some
kind of obstacle and they bounce against
it the only difference between the
dominant female here in red and the
other individuals is that for her the
height of the obstacle which is in fact
the risk perceived from the road is just
slightly higher and these tiny
difference in the individual rule of
movement is sufficiently explain what we
observe that the dominant female leads
her group to the road and then gives way
to the others for them to cross first
Jorge box was an English statistician
once wrote all models are false but some
models are useful and in fact this model
is obviously false because in reality
makers anything but random particles but
it's also useful because it tells us
that extreme simplicity in movement
rules at the EB at the individual level
can result in a great deal of complexity
at the level of the group so again
that's simplifying complexity I would
like to conclude on what this means for
the whole species when the dominant
female gives way to a subordinate is not
out of courtesy
in fact the dominant female is extremely
important for the key for the cohesion
of the group if she dies on the road the
whole group is at risk so this behavior
of risk avoidance is a very old
evolutionary response these meerkats are
replicating an evolved tactic that we
thousands of generations old and they're
adapting it to a modern risk in this
case a road built by humans they adapt
very simple rules and the resulting
complex behavior allows them to resist
human encroachment into the natural
habitat in the end he may be bats who
change their social structure in
response to a population crash we may be
in meerkats who show normal adaptation
to a human road we may be in others
pieces my message here and it's not a
complicated one but a simple one of
Wanda and hope my message here is that
animals show extraordinary social
complexity and this allows them to adapt
and respond to changes in the
environment within three words in the
animal kingdom simplicity relates to
complexity which leads to resilience
thank you
[Music]
thank you very much you could offer this
great start a little bit nervous okay
I'm sure a lot of people in the audience
somehow try to make associations between
the animals you were talking about the
bats meerkats
and humans you brought some examples the
females are the social ones the females
are the dominant ones I'm not sure who
thinks how but is it okay to do these
associations are there stereotypes you
can confirm in this regard that can be
valid across all species well I would
say there's also counter examples to
these stereotypes for example in there
in the sea horses are in koalas in fact
these are males who take care of the
young always and the lesson is that it's
it's often difficult than sometimes even
a bit dangerous to draw parallels
between humans and animals so that's it
okay thank you very much for this great
start
Thank You Nicole a felony
[Music]